one of the core elements of procedural shading is that you
can dynamically incorporate properties of the geometry into the shader.
Those are to name some examples, the normal direction that the surface is facing,
the curvature of the mesh or the global position of the surface.
Information about the geometry like this
can be used alongside with procedural methods
of creating schrader's to make a shader sensitive to the context that it
is set up in this way the geometric information that I mentioned can
be used to cause a layer of dust to appear only on surfaces,
pointing upwards more dust to accumulate in crevices and
the gradient of dust building up from the ground.
And of course it can also be used for any other costs that is not just related
to give you a few examples of the possibilities.
I just want to show you the use cases
that I mentioned but there are several other inputs
that can be used as a source to include
additional information in your shader in this video.
I want to mostly emphasize the general concept
of using various sources of information as inputs.
You can find all the available inputs in the input category of the adding menu.
Be aware though that not all of these features are available in both better engines.
So let's quickly go through the examples 1x1.
Keep in mind that this is just a selection of examples.
An ocean of other things is possible using all kinds of input information
to achieve the dust layer that is dynamically on top of the surface.
I simply use the normal cornice of the geometry.
The important differentiation here is between
the global normals from the geometry node
and the local normals that rotate with the object from the texture coordinate node
to turn the normal cornice into a mask of victories.
That point in a similar direction,
you can use a vector math notes, set to the dot product operation,
the dot product is a mathematical operation that essentially gives
you a measure of how parallel to normal vectors are.
If the dot product is one, they are totally parallel.
If it is zero,
they are standing at a 90 degree angle to each other and
if it is negative they are standing opposite to each other.
So by choosing the second vector,
you can select the direction that the mosque should be pointing in
By simply choosing the vector of 001 that points directly upwards.
That gives us exactly the mosque that we need and that mosque can then simply be used
to make the dust layer on top of the material to add the dust to crevices,
you can simply use the ambient occlusion node
that works in both E V.
And cycles and gives you a mosque of where multiple
close surfaces create a narrow spot where light gets trapped.
Ambient occlusion also takes into account the closeness of other
objects or the dust application that is perfectly fine.
But in other applications you might want to use, for example,
the point in this output from the geometry note instead,
this works differently than ambient occlusion that only
considers the curvature of the mash itself.
The point of this feature however only works with cycles currently
To create a gradient that goes from the ground level upwards.
We can simply use the global Coronas from the
geometry note just separate the vector's components and map,
these that component from the required range 0-1
here.
You can also see something that is very nice about
working with these procedural setups in combination with the V.
If the shader is sensitive to the geometry than any changes in the model,
immediately affect how the shader looks,
everything updates in real time and you can directly see what you're working on.
Another input type that I want to mention here are vertex colors.
Vertex colors are not by themselves a
procedural input but they are incredibly useful to
make a shader accessible for easy manual
our direction when composing a procedural shader,
we will be using vertex colors in the following chapter about
shader composition for easily masking together different parts of a shader.
Vertex colors can also be procedurally driven by other interactions and blender.
If you enable dynamic paint from the physics properties,
you can set up the canvas to output into a vertex color layer, which in turn,
you can then also using the shader.
I don't want to get into too much detail how to set up dynamic pain at this point.
You can check out the example scene if you want to.
There are many options that you can set it up with and
I want to lay focus on the general integration of external information.
Just know that using dynamic paint either with vertex colors or image textures is
a great way for example to gain
information about the proximity of multiple objects.
This can work similar to ambient occlusion between objects but it
has a lot more adjust ability and functionality than that.
This proximity can be extremely useful for example,
to transition between different materials on multiple objects and create the
facts around objects that dynamically adjust to the scenes layout.
Using dynamic paint, I added a melting Suzanne to the example seen here,
the measure of Suzanne is taken as the brush and the floor and the rug as the canvas.
And that way I can simply access the mask of the measures proximity as a
vertex Scalia and use it to control the shader for it to update automatically.
You have to play back the animation dynamic paint also has a ton of other
cool settings that can be used to drive a shader with various types of effects.
I won't go into these any further at this point but please do
go ahead and experiment with them yourself as well as a conclusion.
I just want to point out again that for procedural shading and
blender you have a lot of different types of inputs that can be
used to put together a dynamic shader that is sensitive to the scenes
context with the knowledge of what tools you have at your expense,
a good technical understanding of the problem you want
to solve and a little bit of creativity.
I assure you that more things are possible somehow than you might think. At first,
I've made this experience multiple times in the past.